# 1.4 The For Loop
Think of the for loop as a more bulky version of the while loop. Here is the generic for loop:

    for(set value; check; increment) {
    	do something;
    }

This may seem confusing, so let's put it into practice. Let's rewrite the squares.c code from earlier, this time with a for loop instead of a while loop.

    #include <stdio.h>
    
    /* squares.c: version 2 */
    
    main() {
    	int i;
    	for(i = 1; i < 21; ++i)
    		printf("%d\n", i^2);
    }

Compare this code to the one in the previous section. Notice we cleaned up the code quite a bit: The following two lines have been removed and put into the condition of the for loop:

    i = 1;
    i++;

Also, you'll notice I replaced the condition i ≤ 20 with i < 21. This only works because i is going up by one; later you will learn that there are non-integer data types that we can increment by 0.5 at a time.

Another thing you may have noticed with the for loop:

    for(i = 1; i < 21; ++i)
    	printf("%d\n", i^2);

I didn't include any curly braces! You may be thinking, "What a hypocrite! He told us that almost every bracket in C has a corresponding closing bracket!” First of all, I said almost. Second, I technically never put an opening curly brace; in fact, I don't need to! If a for loop is less than two lines (including the condition) you don't need curly braces. So, I can simplify the following expressions:

    for(i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
    	printf("asd\n");
    }
    
    for(i = 0; i < 3; i++) {}

into:

    for(i = 0; i < 3; i++)
    	printf("asd\n");
    
    for(i = 0; i < 3; i++);

> Note: What do you think the second statement does? 

[Previous](1.3%20The%20While%20Loop.md)

[Next](1.5%20If%2C%20Else%2C%20and%20Else-If.md)