# 2.2.1 Overflow
Sometimes an int is just too small for what we need. When that happens, at around 2.3 billion, the value loops – so once it becomes too big, what happens?

Let's find out!

The Odometer Principle
----------------------

You're probably familiar with an odometer or an odograph – it's the mileage counter in a car, on the dashboard, behind the steering wheel. The normal 6-digit odometer counts until 999,999 miles. The normal car lasts only a fifth of that - 200,000 miles – so seeing this number is rare, at best. But let's say that we had a super strong car that could last 1,000,023 miles exactly, before it no longer works, at all, ever.

The normal odometer would start at

|     |     |     |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   |

And eventually work its way up. Nine miles out of the dealership, we will see this:

|     |     |     |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 9   |

If I drive one more mile, the odometer will read:

|     |     |     |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 1   | 0   |

Because 9 + 1 ends in 0 and the overflow adds one to the next place. The same will hold with 99, 999, 9,999, and 99,999. But what about 999,999? After all, our odometer will only read to six digits, so there is no where to overflow!

Well, that answers our question. See, without anywhere to overflow, the odometer will read:

|     |     |     |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   |

The integer that got cut out in the last place will never see the light of day. If you wanted to, you could sell the car at this point, claiming it to be brand new, and no one would be the wiser.

Let's create an odometer that resembles an unsigned int. It will be 9 digits long, and will run from

|     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   |

To:

|     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 4   | 2   | 9   | 4   | 9   | 6   | 7   | 2   | 9   | 5   |

Now, let's say, by some weird error, beyond this number, the odometer won't go any further. Just like with our super strong car, it will overflow and go back to zero. In the same way, signed ints will go from -2.1 billion to 2.1 billion. Once it reaches the maximum value, it will loop back.

> Note: Back in the days of mechanical odometers, you could drive a car backwards, and the odometer would start going backwards. If I were the sucker who bought the car at 1,000,000 miles (the super strong car is mechanical, by the way) and drove it backwards for a mile, the odometer would go back to reading 999999, the biggest possible value. In the same way, if I had an unsigned int which had the value zero, and I subtracted one, I would have the maximum value possible, which was 4.2 billion.

Testing the Program
-------------------

Let's test out this phenomenon.

    #include <stdio.h>
    
    /* overflow.c: demonstrate overflow principles in C */
    
    int main() {
    	int a = 2147483647; /* the maximum value of a signed int */
    	int b = -2147483648; /* the minimum value of a signed int */
    	
    	unsigned int c = 4294967295; /* the maximum value for an unsigned int */
    	unsigned int d = 0; /* the minimum value of an unsigned int */
    
    
    	/* First, I'm going to print the original values of these variables */
    	printf("a = %d\nb = %d\nc = %d\nd = %d\n", a, b, c, d);
    
    	printf("====\n"); /* a visual divider */
    	
    	/* Now, I'm going to overflow those values using the odometer principle. */
    	a++;
    	b--;
    	c++;
    	d--;
    
    	/* Now, to print the new values */
    	printf("a = %d\nb = %d\nc = %d\nd = %d\n", a, b, c, d);
    }

This is the output:

    a = 2147483647
    b = -2147483648
    c = -1
    d = 0
    ====
    a = -2147483648
    b = 2147483647
    c = 0
    d = -1

Thoughts
--------

What do you think will happen in these cases? Try it!

*   Setting an unsigned int to a negative value
*   Setting a char to 0 and subtracting one
*   Setting a char to a value greater than 255
*   EXTRA CHALLENGE: Writing a program fact.c, which prints out the factorial of all numbers from zero to fifty

> Note: a factorial is a mathematical operation which takes the product of the number in question and all the previous numbers. It's mainly used in probability. It's stylized as n! So,
> 
> \\\[n! = n\*(n-1)\*(n-2)\*...\*3\*2\*1\\\]
> 
> I know this may seem confusing, but it's actually very simple. For instance,
> 
> \\\[3! = 3 \*2\*1 = 6\\\]
> 
> In a similar manner,
> 
> \\\[4! = 4\*3\*2\*1 = 24\\\]
> 
> So, we can write:
> 
> \\\[4! = 4 \* 3! = 4 \* 6 = 24\\\]
> 
> In a similar manner, we can write
> 
> \\\[n! = n \* (n-1)!\\\]
> 
> Hopefully this will give you a hint as to how to solve the last problem.
> 
> Once you have your own piece of code written for this problem, here is the [solution file](2.2.1%20Overflow/fact.c) and the [output](2.2.1%20Overflow/fact.txt.md). If you want the executable (the a.out file), download it [here](2.2.1%20Overflow/a.out).