# 2.2 Basic Data Types
Before we get into the essentials of data structures, we should start with our very basics.

A computer is composed of bits, most of which can either store a 1 or a 0.

Because a bit is extremely small, we find it hard to work with. So, we group these bits into a bigger structure. We call these bytes, and those are comprised of eight bytes.

C thinks of everything as bytes. Every single data type is composed of a certain number of bytes:

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| Data Type | Number of Bytes |
| int | 4   |
| char | 1   |
| long | 4 (32-bit computers) or 8 (64 bit computers) |
| float | 4   |
| double | 8   |

You don't have to memorize all of these; just the first two should be enough. There are two types of integers: unsigned and signed. An unsigned int ranges from 0 to 232 \- 1, or 4,294,967,295. A signed int ranges from -231 to 231 - 1, or -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647. That's a lot of space! Normally, we wouldn't use a number more than 4.3 billion, [but there are cases](2.2%20Basic%20Data%20Types/2.2.1%20Overflow.md). The default int type is signed.

```c
int a = -3 /* declare a signed integer */
unsigned int b = 3 /* declare an unsigned integer (positive values only) */
```

Characters are different – they are just one byte, which means that they have 256 spaces. However, we can't initialize a char to a numerical value – that's not what char is for. The reason why we have characters is to store ASCII values.

What is ASCII? ASCII is the set of all basic characters that you will need in C. It includes everything from the letters of the alphabet to special characters like ‘\\n’. If you want, look at an online ASCII table and revel in its glory.

> Note: While you cannot set a char to an integer value, ASCII/char values are, under the covers, just integer values from 1 to 128. The same holds for ints;  So, if we wanted, we can print the integer value of a character using `%d`.

Done? Okay. Now, you may notice; there are only 128 entries in an ASCII table, ranging from zero through 127. What about the other half of the byte? Well, like I said earlier, C thinks of everything as bytes. So, while 1 byte is twice as much space as we need, we can't exactly specify a data type to 7 bits, we have to settle for a byte.

An ASCII value is a single character contained in single quote characters. If we wanted to set a character to a letter, t, we would do this:

```c
char c = 't'; /* set a character, c, to the ASCII value of t. */
```

Let's create a program which will print out our own ASCII table.

Can you try this before hand? I'll give you a hint: to print out an ASCII character using a placeholder, use `%c`. Looking at an ASCII table online may help, too.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
   
/* ascii.c: print out all ASCII characters and their corresponding values */
    
int main() {
   	int i;
   	for(i = 0; i < 128; i++)
   		printf("%d\t%c\n", i, i);
}
```

You may be wondering why I chose to set i as an int instead of a char. In reality, both of them are interchangeable; as I said earlier, both of them are, under the covers, just integer values that are too small to be ints.

Let's break this code down:

```c
int main() {
   	int i;
```

Alternatively, you could have done this:

```
int main() {
   	char i;
```

Yes, it works the exact same, despite a warning getting thrown at you from the compiler.

```c
for(i = 0; i < 128; i++)
   	printf("%d\t%c\n", i, i);
```

You can probably guess why I can use %d and %c with the same variable here. What does \\t mean, though? Well, the n in \\n stands for “Newline”. The t in \\t stands for “tabspace”. It creates a character that is set to exactly 4 whitespaces. The main use of \\t is to provide a visual separator. For instance, here are is (part) of the output of ascii.c:

    $ ./a.out | more
    59	;
    60	<
    61	=
    62	>
    63	?
    64	@
    65	A
    66	B
    67	C
    68	D
    69	E
    70	F
    71	G

> Note: Because the output of ascii.c is extremely long, and we probably don't want to scroll all the way back to the top, we use `| more` - which essentially outputs a.out to a program named more, which essentially lets you scroll through the code. The use the up and down keys to navigate through the file and type ‘q’ to quit.

[Previous](2.1%20Functions.md)

[BONUS SECTION!](2.2%20Basic%20Data%20Types/2.2.1%20Overflow.md)

[Next](2.3%20Intro%20to%20Arrays.md)
