# 2.3 Intro to Arrays
Suppose we wanted to store multiple integers or characters back to back. It would be quite tedious, declaring and initializing all these variables, wouldn't it? Arrays to the rescue!

Usually, we would use a character array. We call those strings. Strings are stored as back to back bytes in memory and are comprised of chars and ASCII values. Because we wouldn't know where to stop, we keep a special array at the end – a \\0 (backslash zero). So, the array “hello” would be seen in computer memory like so:

|     |     |     |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| h   | e   | l   | l   | o   | \\0 |

We can initialize an array like this:

    int arry[8] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 7}; /* an integer array */
    char myString[] = "hello"; /* a character array, AKA a string */

Compare the first line to the second line. Notice we had to specify the length in between the square brackets in front of arry\[\]. That's because \\0 has a value – it's equal to zero. Since all characters are just integers, C will read the \\0 as another int in the  array and will continue reading. C needs to know how much memory is included in the array. In character arrays, the signal in the end of the array will be the ‘\\0’; int arrays don't have that. There is no easy way to solve this, so when we declare an int array, we pass in the expected length along with the name, and optionally the contents.

## Arrays are sets of data
You can have integer arrays, character arrays, float arrays, or any type of array you would like. Think of an array as a row, or line, of data. If you want, you can even have arrays of arrays! We call these **multi-dimensional arrays**, and we declare them like so:

```
int myBigArray[4][5];
```

It will look something like this:

|     |     |     |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 7   | 9   | 4   | 2   | 3   | 1   |
| 0   | 5   | 6   | 5   | 0   | 8   |

## Finding the value of a single cell in an array
In order to find the value of the third cell in `myString`, we do this:

```
printf("%c\n", myString[2]);
```

The reason why we put \[2] instead of \[3] is quite simple, really. The way arrays work in C, the first value is \[0], the second is \[1], and so on.
